---
title: On nuance
author: Stijn
date: '2018-03-03'
slug: on-nuance
categories:
  - theory
tags: []
---

Keeping in theme with the swearing, another paper I would like to present is 
["Fuck Nuance" by Kieran Healy](https://kieranhealy.org/files/papers/fuck-nuance.pdf), a sociology
professor. He describes the trap of trying to explain complex social science 
problems with ever more complex theories. It's akin to the tendency of asking 
the seminar question: "Have you thought about all these other factors that 
also might play a role?" [^alternative]. I see it a lot and when my 
undergraduates, honours and Phd students try to improve on a theory. They 
just try to add more bells and whistles. I guess in some of the accounting 
literature it shows up as tesing for more and more variables that explain
earnings management or that moderate the effect of incentives on performance.

Healy gives three reasons why too much nuance in a theory is possibe and
should be avoided.

1. If theories can be ever more expanded upon by making them more nuanced it 
  becomes more difficult to refute them. In that sense, Agency Theory is not 
  really a theory. You can always come up with a new Agency Theory model that
  fits your data. A single Agency Theory model can be seen as a theory and 
  can be refuted by data. A good theory does not need to be adapted for each
  new application.

2. Less nuance can be interesting. Healy explains that the interestingness of
  a theory is not just an attribute of a theory, it also depends on who is
  communicating and who is the audience. In a literature full of nuanced
  theories, where every effect depends on country specific institutions, a
  simple theory that holds universally is interesting.

3. There are also strategic reasons to not care too much about nuanced
  theories. Simpeler theories are easier to communicate and understand. They
  can spread easier.

[^alternative]: Which is a different question from "Is it possible that your effect is driven by this other explanation?". This is basically saying you need a different theory *not* make your theory more complicated.